Hey guys, welcome to Lecture 42,
Groupby on DataFrames.
So in this lecture, we'll be learning
how to use Groupby, on DataFrames.
So, import the usual numpy as np,
pandas as pd.
And then from pandas,import DataFrame and
Series.
We're gonna start out
by making a data frame.
So we'll say dframe = DataFrame.
And I'm gonna construct this
DataFrame using a dictionary.
So let's go ahead and
start off with the first column, k1.
And then I'm just gonna have this
column be a list of letters.
So we'll say x, x, y, y.
And finally we'll have it be z.
Okay.
Next column will be K2, second key.
And this one I'm just gonna have
it be a series of alpha and betas.
So alpha 'Beta' 'alpha' 'beta' and
then 'alpha' finally.
And then we'll have two data sets
that will just be random numbers.
So I'll say data 'dataset1}).
I'll call this guy mp.random.randn.
That would be five numbers.
And then we'll have dataset2.
And we'll just have this
be np.random.randn.
In code would be five as well.
Okay and then let's just take a quick
look at what that data frame looks like.
So we have a series of five
by two random numbers.
That matrix there.
And we have our two datasets,
and essentially two keys for
those datasets, the k1 and k2 column.
Columns.
So how can we use Groupby?
Well, we can use Groupby to create
what's called a serious Groupby object.
So I'm going to say, let me grab the data
set from the data set one column.
And group it by the k1 key.
So, I can say group1 equals
from the dataset column,
the dataset 1 column.
I'm going to say Groupby.
And then we're gonna group
it by the k1 column.
And then if we want to
see what this looks like.
We're actually just going to
need to get a confirmation,
its a serious group by object.
We won't actually see what it is.
So there's the kind of object it is.
If we wanna see stuff, we can perform
operations on the particular group.
So I can say group1, and
then check out the mean.
And now I have k1, the key.
And X, Y and Z, the means for
each of that data set one.
So I can use group keys
that are series' as well.
So to expand on this example, let's go
ahead and make some arrays to use as keys.
So, I'm going to say cities = np.array.
And now I'm going to put
in some city initials.
So, lets say NY.
Lets put in LA, put in LA again, and
then I'll have two more New York's, NY.
Okay, those are my cities.
And then I'm gonna have some
in a month array as well.
So I'll call np.array, and then we're
gonna make a list of just months.
So Jan, February, January.
We'll just have it be alternating.
January.
Okay.
So let's run that.
And now using the data from data set one.
I'm gonna group the means by city and
month.
So I'll show you what I mean.
Let's go ahead and try that out.
So, let's grab dataset1
column Then we call Groupby.
And what do I want to group by?
I want to group by cities, and month.
Those two arrays.
And then I wanna grab the mean by that.
So what does that look like?
So, it's lined up the cities first,
and then the month.
So it's grouped them in that fashion.
And then it's averaged out, the dataset1.
Based on those two arrays that I
assigned to it, onto dataset one.
Let's see the original dataset again.
So I'll call dframe.
So here's the dframe, and
I can see the values that align up.
So I have my 0.899.
That was LA February.
Point 533, that was January for that guy.
And then the 252 was New York, February.
Alright cool.
So those values lined up.
We can also pass column
names as group keys.
So let's go ahead and try that out.
So for instance I can say
dframe.groupby('k1') and
then get the mean( ) from that.
So now I've group my
dataframe by this k1 column.
So I grouped up all the x's,
all the y's, and all the z's together.
And then I grabbed the means of those
two data sets, based on their k1 key.
So for instance,
if we look at dataset1, on the x row.
That result is just
the average of -0.3 and 0.89.
Since those two were assigned
the x on the k1 column.
Okay, and then we can even say
something like, Groupby method.
To get the group sizes.
So I can say, Groupby.
Well before we do that,
I can just show you real quick.
That I can get the mean
on multiple columns.
So I could say Groupby,
let's say we just did the mean on k1.
If we wanted to do the mean on both keys,
I could just pass a list.
And then ask for the mean.
And now it's giving you
the average based on both keys.
So the average for every term in
the dataset that has both X and alpha.
Or X and beta.
Or Y and alpha, and Y and beta.
Or just Z in alpha out
of those two data sets.
So hopefully these examples are starting
to get a little more concrete.
As we call by certain keys and
get the means.
And now back to getting sizes.
I can say, dframe.groupby.
I'll group it by the k1 key,
and then get the size.
So this means,
I have two terms that have x in k1.
Two terms that have y in k1.
And then one term that has
z in k1 in that data frame.
And if I look at that data frame.
I can see that that was the case.
Cool.
So we can iterate over groups as well.
So to show you an example of this.
I'll say for name,group in dframe.groupby.
We'll say it's K1 i'm going to
print 'This is the group name'.
So I'll say,
This is the %s to get that string.
This is the group label it %name.
And i'm going to print group.
And then print a new line.
So what this is gonna do is, it's gonna
check the name, and check the group.
And it's gonna print out,
this is the blank group, from k1.
So it should say, this is the.
Since, k1 is X's, Y's and Z's.
So it's gonna iterate
through all those names.
So, it's gonna say at first,
this is the X group.
And then it's gonna give
us this dataset here.
Since that was the X group.
Then it's gonna say, this is the Y group.
And it should give us this dataset here.
Since those both have Y as their k1 value.
And then it's finally going
to give us the Z group.
So let's go ahead and see if that worked.
So that's what we get.
We say this is the X group.
And it gives us the data sets, and
the two columns for that group.
And again for the Y and the Z group.
So that was iterating by a single key.
We can do the exact same thing for
multiple keys.
So I can say for instance,
for (k1, k2) group
in dframe.groupby.
And I'll say K1 K2.
And I can print, I can say, key1 = string,
which we'll see in a second.
Key2 = the other string.
Close that off.
And then we'll call (k1,k2)
to fill out those keys.
I'll say, print group.
And then print a new line,
to get some separation.
So let's think about
what this is gonna do.
What this should do is,
it should print out both keys for you.
So right now, our keys that we're
using are k1 key and k2 key.
So Key 1 is gonna be your letters.
So your x's, your y's, your z's.
Key 2, since it's k2,
is gonna be your alpha or your beta.
Then it's going to print the group
that belongs to both of those keys.
So, for instance, the first thing that we
should see, and I'll print the dframe, so
we have a reference.
For the first iteration,
I should get the first key, which is K1.
So it's gonna say Key1 is equal to X.
And then it's gonna say Key2
from k2 is equal to alpha.
And then it's gonna print
the data set where that's true.
And for
this it just happens to be one row.
So it should be printing out that dataset.
And then it's gonna do that for
the rest of them.
So, let's go ahead and see if that works.
And there you have it.
You have Key 1 = X.
And then Key 2, I forgot to write equals.
Let's run it again.
Okay, now we've added an equals there.
Equals alpha, and it's giving you
the dataset where those Keys matched up.
All right.
Then it's done that,
it's iterated that through
the entire dataframe.
And you can see that data frame there.
Great.
So, what else can we do?
So a possibly useful tactic for this is
creating a dictionary of the data pieces.
So if we wanted to do that.
I could say something like have a object,
group_dict.
And I will create
a dictionary by using dict.
And I will pass a list through it.
And that list is going to
come from dframe.groupby.
And I will group it by the first Key,
that k1.
So let me run that.
So now I have my group dictionary.
And so now let's show the group with X.
So I can say, group_dict,
and we'll pass it with X.
And now it's shown us every row,
that had X as K1 value.
We could've also chosen
to do this with axis = 1.
So let's create a dictionary for
d types of objects.
And that's d types, as in the letter d.
So i'm gonna say make another object,
group_dict.
And i'm gonna label it also access one.
I'm going to do the exact same thing.
Dictionary List.
And I'm going to do this by creating
dframe.groupby, dframe.dtypes.
And I'm going to do this on axis = 1.
So let's run that.
And then I'm gonna show
you what that looks like.
So what did we end up getting?
We ended up getting basically
a separation of your types.
So here you have the d types,
which are just your floating numbers.
And then you have your letter types,
which are the k1 and k2 columns.
So, its actually separated
the dataframe by the types of data.
And it did it along the axis = 1.
Great.
So we can use groupby to actually
separate data, by the actual data type.
So, if you wanted to separate
numbers versus words.
Or something of that manner.
Next we can learn how to
use groupby with columns.
So.
Let's go ahead and
make an object called dataset2_group.
And for this example,
lets say if we only wanted to
group the dataset2 column
with both set of keys.
I can say dframe.groupby.
I'll pass a list of both keys to it.
And then I'll say it's equal to dataset2.
Right here, and
then we can get the mean of this.
So dataset2_group.mean,
so this is gonna find the mean of
dataset2, using both keys.
So, it's gonna look at
all the dataset2 values.
Then group it by both keys.
Anything that has X's and alphas,
X's and betas, Y's and alphas, Y's and
betas, Z's and alphas.
And then it's going to average up
all the objects that share that.
So if we look at that,
that's the result we get.
And since there's only one of each object,
the average is going to be
the same as that data itself.
So it's a group that averaged it.
But since they only had one entry for
both keys, it's the same as the value.
So we have, for instance, -0.19.
-0.19 here.
And this x is an alpha.
X is an alpha.
So that's about it as far as groupby.
We'll be using this tool
slightly in the future.
So go ahead and look back at the examples.
The main takeaway,
is that you can either group by columns,
or group by your certain keys.
And you can get certain
information off your dataframe.
And leave other things behind.
All right, so
next we're gonna have a quick lesson on
grouping with dictionaries and series.
I'll see you there.